WWAARRNNIINNGG
TThhiiss mmaatteerriiaall hhaass bbeeeenn rreepprroodduucceedd aanndd ccoommmmuunniiccaatteedd ttoo yyoouu bbyy oorr oonn bbeehhaallff ooff tthhee
UUnniivveerrssiittyy ooff MMeellbboouurrnnee iinn aaccccoorrddaannccee wwiitthh sseeccttiioonn 111133PP ooff tthhee CCooppyyrriigghhtt AAcctt 11996688 ((AAcctt))..
TThhee mmaatteerriiaall iinn tthhiiss ccoommmmuunniiccaattiioonn mmaayy bbee ssuubbjjeecctt ttoo ccooppyyrriigghhtt uunnddeerr tthhee AAcctt..
AAnnyy ffuurrtthheerr rreepprroodduuccttiioonn oorr ccoommmmuunniiccaattiioonn ooff tthhiiss mmaatteerriiaall bbyy yyoouu mmaayy bbee tthhee ssuubbjjeecctt ooff
ccooppyyrriigghhtt pprrootteeccttiioonn uunnddeerr tthhee AAcctt..
DDoo nnoott rreemmoovvee tthhiiss nnoottiiccee

The University of Melbourne acknowledges the Traditional Owners of the unceded land on which we work, learn
and live: the Wurundjeri Woi-wurrung and Bunurong peoples (Burnley, Fishermans Bend, Parkville, Southbank
and Werribee campuses), the Yorta Yorta Nation (Dookie and Shepparton campuses), and the Dja Dja Wurrung
people (Creswick campus).
The University also acknowledges and is grateful to the Traditional Owners, Elders and Knowledge Holders of all
Indigenous nations and clans who have been instrumental in our reconciliation journey.
We recognise the unique place held by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the original owners and
custodians of the lands and waterways across the Australian continent, with histories of continuous connection
dating back more than 60,000 years. We also acknowledge their enduring cultural practices of caring for Country.
We pay respect to Elders past, present and future, and acknowledge the importance of Indigenous knowledge in
the Academy. As a community of researchers, teachers, professional staff and students we are privileged to work
and learn every day with Indigenous colleagues and partners.
In making this Acknowledgment of Country we commit to respectful and responsible conduct towards all others
according to the Traditional lores of this land, particularly at times of formal ceremony.

Topic 3:
Genes and
First-Year
Heredity
Biology

What will you learn this week in Topic 3?
By the end of this week you will be able to:
Week 9 lectures
• Demonstrate how genetic maps are both generated by, and useful to, the analysis
of genetic crosses involving linked loci.
• Predict the outcomes of a genetic cross where multiple genes contribute to the
same phenotype.
• Explain the different ways that gene expression can be controlled and why this
may be useful.
Page [4]

Week 9, Lecture 25
Gene linkage and recombination
Hayley Bugeja
CRICOS

Learning outcomes
By the end of this lecture, you will be able to demonstrate how genetic maps are both
generated by, and useful to, the analysis of genetic crosses involving linked loci.
This includes being able to:
• Explain how new allele combinations can be produced by crossing over between
homologous chromosomes.
• Define the different allele arrangements of linked genes and apply this to genetic
cross data.
• Analyse data from genetic test crosses to create a linkage map.
• Use linkage maps to predict the outcomes of genetic crosses.
Page [6]

Let's check in: Unlinked versus linked genes
Genes located on the
Genes located on
same chromosome
different chromosomes
|     |     | B   | b   | A   | a   |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| A   | a   |     |     |     |     |
|     |     |     |     | B   | b   |
| A B | a b | a B | A b | A B | a b |
More frequent than
Equal frequency
|     |     |     |     | a B | A b |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
1 : 1 : 1 : 1 ratio of gamete genotypes
Slide from Lecture 24

Let's check in: Unlinked versus linked genes
A A a a
L L l l
B B b b

Recognition of linked genes
Alfred Sturtevant Thomas Hunt Morgan
Sturtevant, A.H. (1913), The linear arrangement of six
sex-linked factors in Drosophila, as shown by their
mode of association. J. Exp. Zool., 14: 43-
59. https://doi.org/10.1002/jez.1400140104

Sturtevant’s cross to demonstrate loss of independent
assortment
Eye colour variant Wing variant
| Wild-type | Vermillion | Wild-type | Rudimentary |
| --------- | ---------- | --------- | ----------- |
| Xv+       | Xv         | Xr+       | Xr          |

Sturtevant’s cross to demonstrate loss of independent
assortment
Female- Vermillion Male- Rudimentary*
Xv r+ Xv+ r
P
X
Xv r+ Y
Xv+ r Xv r+
F1
Xv r+ Y
Female- WT Male- Vermillion
* Fewer rudimentary observed

Sturtevant’s cross to demonstrate loss of independent
assortment
Female- WT Male- Vermillion
F1
Xv+ r Xv r+
X
Xv r+ Y

Xv r+ Y
F2
P
Xv r+ Xv+ r
X
Xv+ r
Xv+ r
Xv+ r
Xv r+ Y
Xv r+
Y
Xv r+
Xv r+
Xv r+
F1
Xv r+
Y
Xv+ r Xv r+
X
Xv r+ Y
Xv+ r+
Xv r+
Xv+ r+
Xv r+
Y
Gametes
Xv+ r Xv r+
Xv r+
Xv r
Xv r
Xv+ r+ Xv r Xv r
Y

Sturtevant’s cross to demonstrate loss of independent
assortment
Expected outcome if independent assortment
|     | Female- WT |     | Male- Vermillion |     |     |
| --- | ---------- | --- | ---------------- | --- | --- |
F1
|     | Xv+ r |     |     | Xv r+ |     |
| --- | ----- | --- | --- | ----- | --- |
X
|     | Xv r+ |     |     | Y   |     |
| --- | ----- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
F2
| WT  | Vermillion | Rudim. | Vermillion |     | Vermil. & Rudim. |
| --- | ---------- | ------ | ---------- | --- | ---------------- |
WT
| 50% | 50% | 25% | 25% | 25% | 25% |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
* Fewer rudimentary
observed

Sturtevant’s cross to demonstrate loss of independent
assortment
Observed outcome
|     | Female- WT |     | Male- Vermillion |     |     |     |
| --- | ---------- | --- | ---------------- | --- | --- | --- |
F1
|     | Xv+ r |     |     | Xv r+ |     |     |
| --- | ----- | --- | --- | ----- | --- | --- |
X
|     | Xv r+ |     |     | Y   |     |     |
| --- | ----- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
F2
| WT  | Vermillion | Rudim. | Vermillion | WT  | Vermil. & Rudim. |     |
| --- | ---------- | ------ | ---------- | --- | ---------------- | --- |
| 451 | 417        | 33*    | 316        | 105 |                  | 4*  |
Not consistent with independent assortment * Fewer rudimentary
observed

Xv r+ Y
F2
P
Xv r+ Xv+ r
X
Xv+ r
Xv+ r
Xv+ r
Xv r+ Y
Xv r+
Y
Xv r+
Xv r+
Xv r+
F1
Xv r+
Y
Xv+ r Xv r+
X
Xv r+ Y
Xv+ r+
Xv r+
Xv+ r+
Xv r+
Y
Gametes
Xv+ r Xv r+
Xv r+
Xv r
Xv r
Xv+ r+ Xv r
Xv r
Y

Crossing over recombines alleles of linked genes
Homologous chromosome pair at prophase I
|     |     |     |     | A   | A a a | a a |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | ----- | --- |
| A   | A   | a   | a   |     |       |     |
|     |     |     |     | B   | b B   | b   |
| B   | B   | b   | b   |     |       |     |
|     |     |     |     |     | b     | b   |
“Chiasma”
Cross-over

Proximity of genes is the main factor influencing linkage
|     |     |     |     |     |     | h   | h   |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|     |     |     |     | H   | H   |     |     |
a
a
| A   | A   | a   | a   |     |     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
b b
| B   |     |     | b   | J   | J   | j   | j   |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|     | B   | b   |     |     |     |     |     |
HJ and hj = Hj and hJ
AB and ab >> Ab and aB
HJ   hj   Hj    hJ

Recombination as a proxy for distance between genes
|     |     |     |     | H   | H   | h   | h   |     |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
50 %
a
a
| A                      | A   | a            | a   |                       |     |              |     |     |
| ---------------------- | --- | ------------ | --- | --------------------- | --- | ------------ | --- | --- |
|                        |     | b            | b   |                       |     |              |     |     |
| B                      |     |              | b   |                       |     | j            | j   |     |
|                        | B   | b            |     | J                     | J   |              |     |     |
| AB and ab >> Ab and aB |     |              |     | LM and lm = Lm and lM |     |              |     |     |
| Parental               |     | Recombinant  |     | Parental              |     | Recombinant  |     |     |
| arrangement            |     | arrangement  |     |                       |     |              |     |     |
|                        |     |              |     | arrangement           |     | arrangement  |     |     |
| A                      |     | B            |     |                       |     |              |     |     |
No. recombinant gametes
|     | x   |     |     | RF = |     |     |     | x100 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | ---- | --- | --- | --- | ---- |
 TOTAL
x  = frequency of recombination (RF)

Sturtevant’s genetic map
* Fewer rudimentary observed
F2
WT Vermillion Rudim. Vermillion WT Vermil. & Rudim.
451 417 33* 316 105 4*
No. recombinant gametes
RF = x100
TOTAL
Distance between
109
x100
RF =
genes calculated as
458
map units
or
RF = 23.8 %
centimorgan (cM)
*note- approximate only given unequal viability

Sturtevant’s genetic map
| y+/y | v+/v |     |
| ---- | ---- | --- |
54.5
w - m  m - r
| w+/w | m+/m | r+/r |
| ---- | ---- | ---- |
Rudimentary
Distance w - r equals w - m plus m- r

Linked genes– cross outcomes
Dihybrid x Dihybrid
Dihybrid x Tester
Gametes  AB : ab : Ab : aB Gametes  AB : ab : Ab : aB AND ab
|     | AB   | ab   | Ab   | aB   |     | ab   |
| --- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | --- | ---- |
| AB  | AB/  | AB/  | AB/  | AB/  | AB  | AB/  |
|     | AB   | ab   | Ab   | aB   |     | ab   |
|     | ab/  | ab/  | ab/  | ab/  |     | ab/  |
| ab  |      |      |      |      | ab  |      |
|     | AB   | ab   | Ab   | aB   |     | ab   |
| Ab  | Ab/  | Ab/  | Ab/  | Ab/  | Ab  | Ab/  |
|     | AB   | ab   | Ab   | aB   |     | ab   |
|     | aB/  | aB/  | Ab/  | aB/  |     | aB/  |
| aB  |      |      |      |      | aB  |      |
|     | AB   | ab   | aB   | aB   |     | ab   |
A - B - :  A - bb : aa B - :  aa bb Aa Bb :  aa bb :  Aa bb :  aa Bb

Calculating Recombination frequency
Dihybrid x Tester
Gametes  AB : ab : Ab : aB AND ab
ab
AB and ab >> Ab and aB
AB/
AB
ab
Recombinants have Ab and aB alleles
|     | ab  | ab/  |     |     |     |     |
| --- | --- | ---- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
ab
|     | Ab  | Ab/  |     |     |     |     |
| --- | --- | ---- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
ab
aB/
|     | aB  |     |     | RF = | X 100 | =     % or      map units |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | ---- | ----- | ------------------------- |
ab
Aa Bb :  aa bb :  Aa bb :  aa Bb
| 400 | 400 | 100 | 100 |     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

Think- pair- share: map distance calculation 1
X
| WT  | Forked, Vermillion |     |     | Xv+ f+ |     |
| --- | ------------------ | --- | --- | ------ | --- |
v+ f+
shown as
| v+ f+  | v  f  |     |     | Xv+ f+ | v+ f+  |
| ------ | ----- | --- | --- | ------ | ------ |
| v+ f+  | Y     |     |     |        |        |
Calculate the map distance between the
|     | X   | Tester | Vermillion and Forked bristle loci? |     |     |
| --- | --- | ------ | ----------------------------------- | --- | --- |
F1
v+ f+
v   f
380 WT
120 Vermillion eye
117 Forked bristles
383 Vermillion eye & forked bristles

Think- pair- share: map distance calculation 2
Calculate the map distance between the
X
WT Forked, Vermillion
Vermillion and Forked bristle loci?
v+ f v f+
v+ f Y
X Tester
F1
v+ f
v f+
118 WT
Do you get the same answer for part 1 & 2?
382 Vermillion eye
381 Forked bristles
What is different about the data?
119 Vermillion eye & forked bristles

cis and trans allele arrangement
Parental alleles in the cis arrangement Parental alleles in the trans arrangement
|     |     | H   | Hh  | h   |     |     | h   | h H | H   |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| A   | A a | a   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |
|     |     |     |     | A   | A a | a   |     |     |     |
|     |     |     | j   | j   |     |     |     | j   | j   |
| B   |     | b J | J   |     |     |     | J   | J   |     |
B b
|     |     |     |     |     | B   | B   |     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
b b
|     | AB and ab >> Ab and aB |     |     |     | Ab and aB >> AB and ab |     |     |     |     |
| --- | ---------------------- | --- | --- | --- | ---------------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
HJ and hj >> Hj and hJ
hJ and Hj >> HJ and hj

Think- pair- share: Analysis of genetic cross
Two recessive phenotypes in mice are droopy ears and flaky tail.
Several pure breeding mice with droopy ears and normal tail were mated to mice with
normal ears and flaky tail.
Offspring of this cross were mated to mice with droopy ears and flaky tail.
In the second cross the following offspring were seen
• Normal tail and normal ears, 4
• Normal ears and flaky tail, 56
• Droopy ears and flaky tail, 3
• Droopy ears and normal tail, 57
Are the gene loci assorting independently?
If not, determine the arrangement of the alleles in the heterozygote and generate a linkage
map
Step 1. Diagram the cross

Think- pair- share: Analysis of genetic cross
D - normal ears
Droopy ears Normal ears
Parent phenotype X d - droopy ears
Normal tail Flaky tail
F - normal tail
Parent genotype f - flaky tail
Gametes
F1 genotype
Normal ears Droopy ears
X
Normal tail Flaky tail
F1 phenotype
F1 gametes
Offspring genotype
Observed
Normal tail and normal ears, 4
Offspring phenotype
Normal ears and flaky tail, 56
Droopy ears and flaky tail, 3
Droopy ears and normal tail, 57

Predicting recombinant outcomes
Consider the following genetic map
W/w Z/z
12 mu
A test cross of a plant WwZz in the cis arrangement generated 100 offspring
What genotype/s would be the most common in the gametes?
What would be the genotype/s of the recombinant offspring?
How many offspring would you expect that are wZ/wz?
How many offspring would you expect that are WZ/wz?

Predicting recombinant outcomes - Demonstration
| W  Z | w   z |     |     |     |     |
| ---- | ----- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
Parent genotype X
|  w  z | w  z |     |     |     |     |
| ----- | ---- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| W  Z  | w  z |     |     |     | wz  |
Gametes produced
|     |     |     |     | W Z | W  Z |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | ---- |
 w  z
| W  z | w  Z |     |     |     |      |
| ---- | ---- | --- | --- | --- | ---- |
|      |      |     |     | w z | w  z |
w  z
|     |     |     |     | W z | W  z |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | ---- |
w  z
| W  Z | w  z | W  z | w  Z |     |     |
| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | --- | --- |
Offspring genotypes
|  w  z | w  z |  w  z | w  z | W Z | w  Z |
| ----- | ---- | ----- | ---- | --- | ---- |
w  z
Total 100

Think- pair- share: Predicting cross outcomes from genetic
maps
The map region below shows the relative map position between five different gene loci.
Each locus has two alleles.
A/a B/b D/d G/g H/h
15 20 40 55 75
Map Independent Give the two parental Give the two recombinant gametes (R)
distance assortment or gametes (P) and what and what percentage of all gametes will
Gene loci (mu) linkage? percentage of all have this combination of alleles
gametes will have this
combination of alleles
A/a and B/b
(cis arrangement)
B/b and H/h
(cis arrangement)
D/d and G/g
(trans arrangement)

Summary
• We can detect linked genes through observing the of
alleles.
• Test crosses (or observing for sex-linked traits) allows us to observe
the proportion of gametes produced with the parental or of
alleles
• Recombination frequency, calculated as the
alleles, is used as a proxy for loci
• Map distances are and can be used to assemble
• can be used to predict the outcomes of a cross
Page [32]

Up next….. Phenotypes are influenced by
interactions between genes
Gene Gene
Biological
product product
characteristic
A B
Or
Page [33]

End page
The University of Melbourne (Australian University) PRV12150/CRICOS
00116K