Week 6, Lecture 3

Cell Signalling

Lara Grollo

CRICOS

Learning Outcomes

At the end of this lecture, you should be able to:

• Use the source and distribution mechanism of a

signal to identify its type.

• Explain how specificity is achieved in a signal

transduction pathway.

• Explain how and why different cells respond to

different chemical signals.

Reference for cell signaling:

•

•

Alberts, B., Bray, D., Hopkin, K., Johnson, A. D., Lewis, J., Raff, M., Robe, K. (2013-10-01). Essential
Cell Biology, 4th Edition. - Chapter 16, pg 526

Hillis, D., Heller, H. C., Hacker, S. D., Hall, D., Sadava, D., Laskowski, M. (20200215). Life: The
Science of Biology, 12th Edition. - Chapter 7 pg 133

https://elevatedac hievement.com/articles/why-measurable-and-achievable-learning-outcomes-are-imperative-to-eac h-and-every-lesson/

Remember:
Energy balance is vital

3

Metabolic reactions are being regulated

4

Brain Teaser
Regulation of processes

My answer

How do cells know
when to undertake
metabolic processes
(e.g. replicate, use
energy, create energy,
photosynthesise etc)?

5

Cell to Cell Communicaiton

•

Individual cells, like multicellular organisms, need
to sense and respond to their environment.

• A free-living cell—even a humble bacterium—must
be able to track down nutrients, tell the difference
between light and dark, and avoid poisons and
predators.

• And if such a cell is to have any kind of “social life,”
it must be able to communicate with other cells.

•

Information can come in a variety of forms, and
communication frequently involves converting the
signals that carry that information from one form to
another

6

7

Different chemical signals

• Autocrine signals affect the cells that

made them

• Juxtacrine signals affect only adjacent

cells

• Paracrine signals affect nearby cells

• Hormones travel to distant

cells, usually via the circular system

8

Some
examples of
different types
of signals

For context only:
do not memorize these!!!

9

Brain Teaser
Plant adaptions

It seems counterintuitive that a cell, having a perfectly abundant supply of nutrients
available, would commit suicide if not constantly stimulated by signals from other cells

Question

What do you
suppose might be
the advantages
of such
regulation?

My answer

10

Signal Detection

11

Signal detection

Membrane receptors:

‒ Large or polar ligands cannot cross the lipid bilayer.
‒ Insulin, for example, is a protein hormone that cannot diffuse

through the cell membrane; instead, it binds to a
transmembrane receptor with an extracellular binding domain.

Intracellular receptors:

‒ Small or nonpolar ligands can diffuse across the nonpolar

phospholipid bilayer of the cell membrane and enter the cell.
‒ The hormone oestrogen, for example, is a lipid-soluble steroid

that can diffuse across the cell membrane; it binds to a receptor
inside the cell.

12

Types of receptors

13

Intracellular
Receptors

14

Membrane
receptors

15

Ion Channel

16

Enzyme coupled

17

G protein-coupled

18

Let’s Revise
Cellular receptors

Question

My answer

Why do protein hormones such as
insulin require membrane-bound
receptors rather than intracellular
receptors?

Why are G-protein-coupled receptors
(GPCRs) particularly effective at
amplifying cellular signals?

19

Brain Teaser
The taste test

There are five basic tastes—sour, salty, sweet, bitter, and “umami.”

Salt is detected when the concentration of salt outside of a taste bud cell is
higher than that inside of it, and ion channels allow the passive leakage
of Na+ into the cell. The resulting change in membrane potential sends the
“salty” signal to the brain.

Umami is a savoury taste generated by glutamate (glutamic acid, found in
monosodium glutamate, or MSG), which is used as a flavour enhancer in
foods such as taco-flavoured tortilla chips. The glutamate receptor is a
GPCR, which, when bound, initiates a signalling pathway that ends with a
cellular response, perceived by you as “taste.”

If you eat a regular potato chip and then rinse your mouth, you will no
longer taste salt. But if you eat a flavoured tortilla chip and then rinse, the
taste persists.

Propose a possible explanation for this difference.

20

Brain Teaser
The taste test

Question

My answer

If you eat a regular potato chip and
then rinse your mouth, you will no
longer taste salt. But if you eat a
flavoured tortilla chip and then rinse,
the taste persists.
Propose a possible explanation for
this difference.

21

Signal pathways
• Cell-Surface Receptors Relay Extracellular Signals via Intracellular

Signaling Pathways

• These can have different effects:

• They can simply relay the signal onward and thereby help

spread it through the cell.

• They can amplify the signal received, making it stronger, so that
a few extracellular signal molecules are enough to evoke a large
intracellular response.

• They can detect signals from more than one intracellular

signaling pathway and integrate them before relaying a signal
onward.

• They can distribute the signal to more than one effector protein,
creating branches in the information flow diagram and evoking a
complex response.

• These pathways are what we call signal transduction pathways.

22

Signal transduction
pathway

23

Cyclic AMP-dependent protein Kinase

24

Signal transduction
pathway

25

Brain Teaser
Yeast on Mars

A rover on Mars identifies several cells that look like mating
yeast cells on earth.  They continue to observe the cells
biochemically throughout the process.

In response to a hormone secreted by a cell of the opposite
mating type, a yeast cell undergoes a complex series of
physiological changes involving the activity of about 200
genes and cytoplasmic proteins.

They include blocking DNA synthesis, growing toward the
mating partner, fusion of the plasma membranes of the two
cells, and fusion of their nuclear membranes.

Explain how all these events can be controlled through
a complex signalling cascade that is triggered by the
binding of the hormone to a G protein–linked receptor.

26

Anders, A.; Colin, R.; Banderas, A; Sourjik, V.

Asymmetric mating behavior of isogamous budding yeast.

Science Advances 7, eabf8404 (2021)
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.abf8404

Brain Teaser
New cells

Question

My answer

Explain how all these events can be
controlled through a complex
signalling cascade that is triggered
by the binding of the hormone to a G
protein–linked receptor.

27

Plants respond too

• Plants sense atmosphere environment with
openings (stomata) that are “guarded” by
guard cells

• Environment factors that change guard cell

size include:
‒ CO2
‒ Air humidity (temperature)
‒ Red light
‒ Blue light
‒ Hormones (sent from the roots when

soil is dry)

28

Plants respond too

29

Plants respond too

30

Plants respond too

You don’t need to know
this...Just be impressed
at the amazing ways
that cells sense and
respond to the
environment!

Mengmeng ZHU, Shaojun DAI, Sixue CHEN. The stomata frontline of plant interaction with the environment-perspectives from hormone regulation[J]. Frontiers in Biology, 2012, 7(2): 96-
112. DOI: 10.1007/s11515-012-1193-3

31

Summary

Page [32]

Summary

Page [33]

Summary

You explore this further in topic 3

Page [34]

Topic 2
Energy and Cells

We are at the end of topic 2.

Can you:
• Justify the importance of energy in biological systems and cells
• Appraise the regulation and relationship in metabolic pathways
• Express the importance of glycolysis in living systems
• Compare and contrast the roles of the TCA cycle and oxidative

phosphorylation for generating energy in mitochondria

• Assess the significance of photosynthesis in all biological systems
• Appraise how individual cells communicate and respond to signals.

35

Up next

Topic 3: Genes and Heredity

Page [36]

