Week 5, Lecture 2
An introduction to glycolysis and
the TCA cycle
Lara Grollo
CRICOS

Biomolecule
review
• Carbohydrates, fats, and
proteins can all be used as
fuel for cellular respiration.
• Monomers of these
molecules enter glycolysis
or the citric acid cycle at
various points.
• Glycolysis and the citric acid
cycle are catabolic funnels
through which electrons
from all kinds of organic
molecules flow on their
exergonic fall to oxygen.
2

An introduction to glycolysis
Learning outcomes:
At the end of this lecture, you should be able to:
1. Explain the major steps in glycolysis.
2. Describe where it takes place.
3. Recall the control points in glycolysis
4. Recall how energy is generated by the TCA cycle
5. Appreciate the importance of the TCA cycle and
https://elevatedachievement.com/articles/why-measurable-and-achievable-learning-outcomes-are-imperative-to-each-and-every-lesson/
glycolysis in anabolism.
Note: Citric Acid Aycle = Kreb’s Cycle = Tricarboxylic Acid (TCA) Cycle

Recall Respiration –
Knowledge Check
• Glycolysis and the citric acid cycle constitute
a small fraction of the reactions that occur in
a cell.
o Circles = molecules in various metabolic
pathways
o Lines = enzymatic reactions that
convert one metabolite to another
• Both catabolic and anabolic pathways
o delivering small organic molecules to be
oxidized for energy, or
o supplying carbon compounds for
biosynthesis.
4

Recall Respiration – Knowledge Check
Question My answer
Before entering the citric acid cycle,
carbohydrates are processed by
glycolysis while lipids are processed
by ß-oxidation. Although different,
both metabolic pathways result in the
production of:
More free energy is harvested during
the citric acid cycle than during
glycolysis, but only 1 mole of ATP is
produced for each more of acetyl CoA
that enters the cycle. Most of the
remaining free energy released
during the citric acid cycle is:
A student prepared this table as an
aid to her study of these metabolic
processes. Which statement best
evaluates the accuracy of the
student’s work? 5

Cellular
Respiration
6

Cellular Respiration
7

• Glycolysis and the citric acid cycle
provide the precursors needed for
cells to synthesize many important
organic molecules.
• The amino acids, nucleotides, lipids,
sugars, and other molecules—shown
here as products—in turn serve as
the precursors for many of the cell’s
macromolecules.
• Each black arrow in this diagram
denotes a single enzyme- catalyzed
reaction; the red arrows generally
represent pathways with many steps
that are required to produce the
indicated products.
8

An introduction to Glycolysis
Urry, L. A., Cain, M. L., Wasserman, S. A., Minorsky, P. V., Orr, R. (20200102). Campbell Biology, 12th Edition [VitalSource
Bookshelf version]. Retrieved from vbk://9780135858141

Glycolysis
Glycolysis
• Takes place in the cytoplasm
• Converts glucose into 2 molecules of
pyruvate
• Produces 2 ATP and 2 NADH
• Occurs in 10 steps

Steps in Glycolysis
• Steps 1–5 require ATP
(energy-investing reactions).
• Steps 6–10 yield NADH and
ATP (energy-harvesting
reactions)

Energy investment Step
Urry, L. A., Cain, M. L., Wasserman, S. A., Minorsky, P. V., Orr, R. (20200102). Campbell Biology, 12th Edition [VitalSource
Bookshelf version]. Retrieved from vbk://9780135858141

Energy Harvesting Reactions
Urry, L. A., Cain, M. L., Wasserman, S. A., Minorsky, P. V., Orr, R. (20200102). Campbell Biology, 12th Edition [VitalSource
Bookshelf version]. Retrieved from vbk://9780135858141

Regulation of glycolysis
TCA cycle

Recall…
Glycolysis reactions are controlled by enzyme regulation
15

Glycolysis Brain Teaser
Why is glycolysis considered to be one of the first metabolic
pathways to have evolved?
My answer:
16

Glycolysis Brain Teaser
• Refer to the figure illustrating how the glycolytic pathway
can be separated into two groups of steps initial steps
and later steps.
• Explain how the initial steps in the glycolytic pathway
differ from later steps. In your discussion, address the
types of reactions taking place and how energy is
involved
My answer:
17

The citric acid
cycle (TCA cycle)
• Acetyl CoA is the starting point.
• Eight reactions completely
oxidizes the acetyl group to 2
molecules of CO2.
• Energy released is captured by
GDP, NAD+, and FAD.
• Oxaloacetate is regenerated in
the last step.

The TCA cycle
• The Acetyl CoA can
come from many
sources.
• Some amino acids can
also enter the citric acid
cycle.

The citric acid
cycle (TCA cycle)
• In the first of a sequence of reactions
called the citric acid cycle, an acetyl
group is combined with oxaloacetate
to yield citrate.
• Citrate undergoes oxidation and
decarboxylation to yield two CO2, one
GTP, three NADH, and one FADH2
with the regeneration of oxaloacetate.
• The direct phosphate transfer of ADP
by GTP yields ATP.

Cholesterol
and fatty
acids
21

Glutamate
Other amino acids
Purines
Heme and
chlorophyl
22

Aspartate
Other AA’s
Purines
Pyrimidines
23

| TCA and energy  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |
| --------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|                 |     |     | (7) |     |     |     |     |
In the presence of Oxygen, Glucose is fully oxidized
GTP can transfer its high-energy phosphate to form ATP.
Overall, the oxidation of one glucose molecule yields:
• 6 CO
2
• 10 NADH
• 2 FADH
2
• 4 ATP
For the citric acid cycle to continue, the starting molecules (acetyl CoA and oxidized
electron carriers) must be replenished.
The electron carriers are reduced, and they must be re-oxidized.
If O is present, it accepts the electrons and H O is formed. But the electrons are not
| 2                    |     |     |     |     | 2   |     |     |
| -------------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| passed directly to O |     | .   |     |     |     |     |     |
2

TCA Brain Teaser
A cyclic reaction pathway requires that the starting material be regenerated and
available at the end of each cycle. if compounds of the citric acid cycle are siphoned
off as building blocks to make other organic molecules via a variety of metabolic
reactions, why does the citric acid cycle not quickly grind to a halt?
My answer:
25

In summary..
• Cellular respiration is
controlled by allosteric
enzymes at key points in
glycolysis and the citric acid
cycle.
26

In summary..
• Glycolysis and the citric acid cycle connect to many other
metabolic pathways
• Catabolic pathways funnel electrons from many kinds of
organic molecules into cellular respiration.
• Anabolic pathways can use small molecules from food
directly or build other substances using intermediates of
glycolysis or the citric acid cycle.
• Many carbohydrates can enter glycolysis, most often after
conversion to glucose. Amino acids of proteins must be
deaminated before being oxidized.
• The fatty acids of fats undergo beta oxidation to two-carbon
fragments and then enter the citric acid cycle as acetyl CoA.
27

Up next
28